README.md, before:

# @suntime-js/core

(static-js was taken (So was js-engine))

A javascript interpreter built on the TC39 ECMAScript 2025 standard, seeking to implement modern language features.

A spiritual successor to [static-eval](https://www.npmjs.com/package/static-eval).

Try it out in [the sandbox](https://sunsetfi.github.io/suntime-js)!

## Sandboxing and Security

Unlike static-eval, this project has ambitions of providing a secure sandbox from which untrusted code can be safely ran.

The fundimental difference with static-eval is that static-js operates entirely against its own implementation of the intrinsic javascript types, complete with its own prototype chain. This seeks to ensure that the code being ran is never able to manipulate the system into accessing the native properties of the underlying native objects, which would allow it to eventually reach a function constructor and therefor gain arbitrary code execution.

Instead, while the code in the sandbox **will** have access to eval() and the function constructor, those functions will instead run their code inside the sandbox, preserving the integrity of the host system.

[More information on StaticJs security](docs/02-security.md)

## What is supported

- Strict directive
- Primitives
- Arrays
- Promises
- Functions / Arrow functions
- Async Functions
- Math
- Error (and variants)
- Symbols (including engine behavior)
  - Symbol.iterator
  - Symbol.hasInstance
  - Symbol.species
  - Symbol.isConcatSpreadable
  - Symbol.toPrimitive
- Control flow / loops
- Unary and binary operators
- Destructuring
- Spread operators (including Symbol.iterator usage)
- ECMAScript Modules
  - Exports
  - Importing from host-defined modules
  - Importing from sandboxed modules

### Notable things not (yet) supported

- Async Modules
- Generator functions
- All well-known symbols not listed above
- Map, Set
- WeakMap, WeakRef, FinalizationRegistry
- Class syntax
- Date
- Regex
- Iterator.return calls

## Test262 coverage

This project is slowly working its way through the [Test262](https://github.com/tc39/test262) suite of JavaScript tests in order to ensure compliance with the spec.

Currently, around 4200 of the language tests are passing, or about 18%. Further work is ongoing in this area.

## Quick Usage (native JS interop)

**Warning**: Using StaticJs this way is vulnurable to deadlocks when given looping code, and can introduce security complications where VM code can be unexpectedly invoked through interacting with the resulting values (eg: property getters and setters).

StaticJs provides quick functions for evaluating simple code: `evaluateExpression`, `evaluateScript`, and `evaluateModule`. These functions take strings as their first argument, and return a promise to the [coerced native value](docs/03-type-coersion.md).

Note that the promise resolves when all microtasks spawned by the expression are complete, not when the macrotask itself completes. This means any VM promise resolutions that occurred as a result of the evaluation will be ran to completion before the returned native promise is resolved.

```ts
import { evaluateExpression } from "@suntime-js/core";

const result = await evaluateExpression("2 + 2");
```

It might seem strange to see an await with a simple expression, but that is because the underlying engine is designed to be able to pause and resume code execution at any time.

For more information, see [Quick Start](docs/01-quick-start.md).

## Detailed Usage

The primary way of interacting with StaticJs is through using a [StaticJsRealm](./04-realms.md).

This gives you full control of the evaluation, including pausing execution, debugging, enforcing time or operation count limits, and configuring the global environment.

## TODO:

- Fix 'all' [Test262](https://github.com/tc39/test262) tests.
  - Currently only running tests in the language folder. Need to add built-ins
- Report code coverage in repo
  coveralls.io?
  [vitest-coverage-report-action](https://github.com/marketplace/actions/vitest-coverage-report)?
- Get api-extractor working. The only holdup right now is the combine and re-export of the interface and factory function of StaticJsRealm
  - Combine these into one file to make this work?
- Add a runTaskSync to realms that allows for time and operation limiting synchronous functions but enforces the task is completed or aborted when the function exits.
- Rename toJs to toNative
- Add scope, variable, and stack info to StaticJsTaskIterator for debugging.
- Investigate debugger for monaco
  [Example implementation?](https://github.com/polylith/monaco-debugger)
  [Docs](https://microsoft.github.io/debug-adapter-protocol/overview)

Commit message:

Fix boxed vs cast primitive constructors.  Fix direct eval

README.md, after:

# @suntime-js/core

(static-js was taken (So was js-engine))

A javascript interpreter built on the TC39 ECMAScript 2025 standard, seeking to implement modern language features.

A spiritual successor to [static-eval](https://www.npmjs.com/package/static-eval).

Try it out in [the sandbox](https://sunsetfi.github.io/suntime-js)!

## Sandboxing and Security

Unlike static-eval, this project has ambitions of providing a secure sandbox from which untrusted code can be safely ran.

The fundimental difference with static-eval is that static-js operates entirely against its own implementation of the intrinsic javascript types, complete with its own prototype chain. This seeks to ensure that the code being ran is never able to manipulate the system into accessing the native properties of the underlying native objects, which would allow it to eventually reach a function constructor and therefor gain arbitrary code execution.

Instead, while the code in the sandbox **will** have access to eval() and the function constructor, those functions will instead run their code inside the sandbox, preserving the integrity of the host system.

[More information on StaticJs security](docs/02-security.md)

## What is supported

- Strict directive
- Primitives
- Arrays
- Promises
- Functions / Arrow functions
- Async Functions
- Math
- Error (and variants)
- Symbols (including engine behavior)
  - Symbol.iterator
  - Symbol.hasInstance
  - Symbol.species
  - Symbol.isConcatSpreadable
  - Symbol.toPrimitive
- Control flow / loops
- Unary and binary operators
- Destructuring
- Spread operators (including Symbol.iterator usage)
- ECMAScript Modules
  - Exports
  - Importing from host-defined modules
  - Importing from sandboxed modules

### Notable things not (yet) supported

- Async Modules
- Generator functions
- All well-known symbols not listed above
- Map, Set
- WeakMap, WeakRef, FinalizationRegistry
- Class syntax
- Date
- Regex
- Iterator.return calls

## Test262 coverage

This project is slowly working its way through the [Test262](https://github.com/tc39/test262) suite of JavaScript tests in order to ensure compliance with the spec.

Currently, around 4400 of the language tests are passing, or about 19%. Further work is ongoing in this area.

## Quick Usage (native JS interop)

**Warning**: Using StaticJs this way is vulnurable to deadlocks when given looping code, and can introduce security complications where VM code can be unexpectedly invoked through interacting with the resulting values (eg: property getters and setters).

StaticJs provides quick functions for evaluating simple code: `evaluateExpression`, `evaluateScript`, and `evaluateModule`. These functions take strings as their first argument, and return a promise to the [coerced native value](docs/03-type-coersion.md).

Note that the promise resolves when all microtasks spawned by the expression are complete, not when the macrotask itself completes. This means any VM promise resolutions that occurred as a result of the evaluation will be ran to completion before the returned native promise is resolved.

```ts
import { evaluateExpression } from "@suntime-js/core";

const result = await evaluateExpression("2 + 2");
```

It might seem strange to see an await with a simple expression, but that is because the underlying engine is designed to be able to pause and resume code execution at any time.

For more information, see [Quick Start](docs/01-quick-start.md).

## Detailed Usage

The primary way of interacting with StaticJs is through using a [StaticJsRealm](./04-realms.md).

This gives you full control of the evaluation, including pausing execution, debugging, enforcing time or operation count limits, and configuring the global environment.

## TODO:

- Fix 'all' [Test262](https://github.com/tc39/test262) tests.
  - Currently only running tests in the language folder. Need to add built-ins
- Async arrow functions
  - Simple and easy; already support async functions
- Eval scoping
  - Need to rework functions to get context of their calls.
- Rework TypeFactory so that realm.types is not undefined while resolving prototypes and constructors.
- Report code coverage in repo
  coveralls.io?
  [vitest-coverage-report-action](https://github.com/marketplace/actions/vitest-coverage-report)?
- Get api-extractor working. The only holdup right now is the combine and re-export of the interface and factory function of StaticJsRealm
  - Combine these into one file to make this work?
- Add a runTaskSync to realms that allows for time and operation limiting synchronous functions but enforces the task is completed or aborted when the function exits.
- Rename toJs to toNative
- Add scope, variable, and stack info to StaticJsTaskIterator for debugging.
- Investigate debugger for monaco
  [Example implementation?](https://github.com/polylith/monaco-debugger)
  [Docs](https://microsoft.github.io/debug-adapter-protocol/overview)
